    BIOCHEMISTRY
    QUESTION BANK


                                                       SFI MEDICOS KERALA




i. Regarding HbF all are true except:

A) It is a tetramer of 2 alpha and 2 gamma chains

B) Affinity for oxygen is more than HbA

C) Increased interaction with 2,3 – BPG

D) Will not copolymerize with HbS

✅ Answer: C (HbF has reduced interaction with 2,3-BPG)
ii. Branched chain keto acids are excreted in urine in large quantities in:

A) Phenylketonuria

B) Homocystinuria

C) Maple syrup urine disease

D) Cystinuria

✅ Answer: C

iii. Mechanism of enzyme inhibition of Ornithine decarboxylase by Di Fluoro Methyl Ornithine:

A) Competitive inhibition

B) Suicide inhibition

C) Non-competitive inhibition

D) Allosteric inhibition
✅ Answer: B
iv. Essential pentosuria is caused by deficiency of:

A) Glucose 6 phosphate dehydrogenase

B) L-xylulose reductase

C) UDP-glucose dehydrogenase

D) Aldolase B

✅ Answer: B
v. Which amino acid can enter the TCA cycle as fumarate and oxaloacetate?

A) Aspartate

B) Glutamate

C) Arginine

D) Serine

✅ Answer: A

✅ Multiple Response Questions (vi–x)

vi. Pellagra-like features are seen in:

1. Pyridoxine deficiency

2. Tryptophan deficiency

3. Carcinoid syndrome

4. Hartnup’s disease

✅ Answer: C) 1, 2, 3, 4 correct
vii. Urea level in blood may be elevated in:

1. Dehydration

2. Renal failure

3. Hepatic failure
4. Starvation

✅ Answer: D) 1, 2, 3, 4 correct
viii. Following are true about collagen:

1. 33% of amino acid composition of collagen is glycine

2. Glycosylation of procollagen occurs on glycine residues

3. In copper deficiency there is reduced cross-linkage of collagen

4. Osteogenesis imperfecta is due to replacement of single glycine residue by cysteine in
Type 1 collagen

✅ Answer: C) 1, 3 correct
ix. Functions of NADPH produced in HMP pathway:

1. Fatty acid synthesis

2. Detoxification via glutathione reduction

3. Glycogenolysis

4. Cholesterol synthesis

✅ Answer: D) 1, 2, 4 correct
x. Which of the following statements are true regarding polyamines?

1. Formed from ornithine and citrulline

2. Necessary for protein synthesis

3. Necessary for stabilization of ribosomes

4. Causes depurination of DNA

5. Cadaverine is a polyamine in mammalian tissue

✅ Answer: C) 1, 3, 4 correct
xi.

Assertion (A): Haemoglobin S (HbS) leads to the formation of sickle-shaped red blood cells.

Reason (R): Copolymerization of HbS occurs in deoxygenated state.

✅ Answer: D (Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A)
xii.

Assertion (A): Transferrin is the primary protein responsible for iron transport in blood.

Reason (R): Transferrin binds to iron in its ferrous (Fe²⁺) form for transport.

✅ Answer: C (A is true, but R is false — transferrin binds iron in ferric (Fe³⁺) form)
xiii.

Assertion (A): Low level of Pyridoxal phosphate would lead to convulsions.

Reason (R): GABA is an inhibitory neurotransmitter and it opens the chloride channel in the
postsynaptic membranes in CNS.

✅ Answer: D (Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A)
xiv.

Assertion (A): Creatinine clearance overestimates the true GFR.

Reason (R): In addition to glomerular filtration, creatinine is also secreted by renal tubules.

✅ Answer: D (Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A)
xv.

Assertion (A): Brain cannot utilize ketone bodies as fuel.

Reason (R): Brain lacks the enzyme thiophorase for utilization of ketone bodies.

✅ Answer: D (Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A)
✅ Case-Based Questions (xvi–xx)

Case Summary:

A 47-year-old male has severe pain, redness, and swelling of the first metatarsophalangeal
joint and right foot. Serum uric acid is 11.2 mg/dL.

xvi. Probable causes of the condition except:

A) Deficiency of glucose 6 phosphatase

B) Deficiency of HGPRT

C) Deficiency of adenosine deaminase

D) Renal failure
✅ Answer: C (Not associated with gout)
xvii. Definitive diagnosis of the condition is by:

A) Serum uric acid ≥ 10 mg/dl

B) Negatively birefringent crystals present in synovial fluid

C) Urate crystals deposited in soft tissue

D) Presence of uric acid stone in the urinary tract

✅ Answer: B
xviii. Features of gout are all except:

A) Serum uric acid ≥ 10 mg/dl

B) Urate crystals present in synovial fluid

C) Urate crystals deposited in soft tissue

D) Presence of uric acid stone in the urinary tract visualised on X-ray

✅ Answer: A (Hyperuricemia alone does not confirm gout)
xix. Which property of uric acid is responsible for the manifestations in the patient?

A) Keto-enol tautomerism

B) Acidic nature

C) Reducing action

D) Solubility constant

✅ Answer: D (Low solubility causes precipitation in joints)
xx. All the following medications may be given to the patient for immediate relief except:

A) Allopurinol

B) Colchicine

C) Corticosteroids

D) Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)

✅ Answer: A (Allopurinol is used for long-term management, not acute relief)
i) Which of the following best describes the function of telomerase?

a) It repairs mismatched base pairs during DNA replication

b) It synthesizes Okazaki fragments on the lagging strand

c) It adds repetitive sequences to the ends of chromosomes

d) It unwinds the DNA helix ahead of the replication fork

Answer: c) It adds repetitive sequences to the ends of chromosomes




ii) The enzyme primarily responsible for converting superoxide radicals into hydrogen
peroxide is:

a) Catalase

b) Peroxidase

c) Superoxide dismutase

d) Glutathione peroxidase

Answer: c) Superoxide dismutase




iii) Which statement accurately describes a key characteristic of the genetic code?

a) It is overlapping and degenerate

b) It is universal and overlapping

c) It is non-overlapping and nearly universal

d) It is organism-specific and non-overlapping

Answer: c) It is non-overlapping and nearly universal




iv) Which checkpoint in the cell cycle ensures that DNA is undamaged before replication
begins?

a) G2/M checkpoint

b) G1/S checkpoint
c) Spindle assembly checkpoint

d) Cytokinesis checkpoint

Answer: b) G1/S checkpoint




v) The application of CRISPR-Cas9 among the following is:

a) Protein purification

b) DNA sequencing

c) Genome editing tool

d) RNA interference

Answer: c) Genome editing tool




vi) Select the porphyrias that are correctly matched with their enzyme deficiencies:




1. Acute intermittent porphyria — Uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase deficiency

2. Porphyria cutanea tarda — Uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase deficiency

3. Erythropoietic protoporphyria — Ferrochelatase deficiency

4. Variegate porphyria Delta-aminolevulinic acid synthase deficiency

a) 1 & 4

b) 1 & 3

c) 2 & 3

d) 3 & 4

Answer: c) 2 & 3




vii) The substances primarily transported in the blood by albumin are:




1. Bilirubin
2. Fatty acids

3. Calcium

4. Iron

a) 1, 2 & 3

b) 1, 2 & 4

c) 2, 3 & 4

d) 1, 3 & 4

Answer: a) 1, 2 & 3




viii) Select the correct statements regarding PCR:




1. Requires thermostable DNA polymerase

2. Uses RNA primers

3. Involves repeated cycles of denaturation, annealing, and extension

4. Requires prior knowledge of the target sequence

a) 1, 2 & 3

b) 2, 3 & 4

c) 1, 3 & 4

d) 1, 2 & 4

Answer: d) 1, 2 & 4




ix) Which of the following values fall within the normal reference range for a healthy adult?




1. Fasting blood glucose: 90 mg/dL

2. Serum sodium: 150 mEq/L

3. Serum potassium: 4.5 mEq/L
4. Total serum calcium: 14 mg/dL

a) 1 & 2

b) 2 & 4

c) 1 & 3

d) 3 & 4

Answer: c) 1 & 3




x) Regarding adrenal function the true statements are:




1. Cortisol increases gluconeogenesis

2. Aldosterone promotes sodium retention

3. ACTH stimulates cortisol release

4. Cortisol has anti-inflammatory effects

a) 1 & 2

b) 2 & 3

c) 1, 2 & 3

d) 1, 2, 3 & 4

Answer: d) 1, 2, 3 & 4




xi) Assertion (A): Cytochrome P450 enzymes are involved in the metabolism of many drugs in
the liver.

Reason (R): Cytochrome P450 enzymes act as oxygen carriers in the mitochondrial electron
transport chain.

a) Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A

b) Both A and R are true, but R is not the correct explanation of A

c) A is true, but R is false

d) A is false, but R is true
Answer: c) A is true, but R is false




xii) Assertion (A): Patients with Xeroderma Pigmentosum have an increased chance of
developing skin cancer.

Reason (R): Due to the defect in Base excision repair.

a) Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A

b) Both A and R are true, but R is not the correct explanation of A

c) A is true, but R is false

d) A is false, but R is true

Answer: c) A is true, but R is false




xiii) Assertion (A): Cystatin C is a more sensitive early marker of reduced GFR than creatinine.

Reason (R): Cystatin C detects kidney dysfunction earlier than creatinine, overcoming the
"creatinine blind area."

a) Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A

b) Both A and R are true, but R is not the correct explanation of A

c) A is true, but R is false

d) A is false, but R is true

Answer: a) Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A




xiv) Assertion (A): Histones do not participate in the organization of DNA within the nucleus.

Reason (R): Histones, rich in lysine and arginine, bind to negatively charged DNA.

a) Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A

b) Both A and R are true, but R is not the correct explanation of A

c) A is true, but R is false

d) A is false, but R is true

Answer: d) A is false, but R is true
xv) Assertion (A): Methotrexate is an anticancer drug.

Reason (R): Methotrexate inhibits thymidylate synthase.

a) Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A

b) Both A and R are true, but R is not the correct explanation of A

c) A is true, but R is false

d) A is false, but R is true

Answer: c) A is true, but R is false




xvi) A 5-year-old child presents to the hospital with yellow discoloration of skin, sclera, and
mucous membranes. Laboratory findings reveal anemia, increased reticulocyte count,
elevated unconjugated bilirubin, and normal liver enzymes. What is the most likely diagnosis?

a) Hepatitis

b) Hemolytic anemia

c) Obstructive jaundice

d) Dubin-Johnson syndrome

Answer: b) Hemolytic anemia




xvii) Which type of bilirubin is elevated in pre-hepatic jaundice?

a) Conjugated bilirubin

b) Unconjugated bilirubin

c) Delta bilirubin

d) Both conjugated and unconjugated bilirubin

Answer: b) Unconjugated bilirubin




xviii) Which urine finding is commonly seen in cases of jaundice?

a) Presence of bile salts and bile pigments
b) Increased urobilinogen

c) Hematuria

d) Ketonuria

Answer: a) Presence of bile salts and bile pigments




xix) What is the underlying biochemical defect in sickle cell disease?

a) Mutation in beta globin gene causing glutamic acid to valine substitution

b) Mutation in alpha globin gene causing glutamic acid to lysine substitution

c) Deficiency of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase

d) Increased synthesis of fetal hemoglobin

Answer: a) Mutation in beta globin gene causing glutamic acid to valine substitution




xx) True statement regarding HbS:

a) HbS is more soluble than HbA

b) HbS confers malaria resistance through balanced polymorphism

c) HbS polymerizes in the oxygenated state

d) HbS is caused by mutation in alpha globin gene

Answer: b) HbS confers malaria resistance through balanced polymorphism




i) Frame shift mutation results from

a) Substitution of a single base

b) Deletion of a single base

c) Addition of a codon

d) Deletion of a codon

Answer: b) Deletion of a single base
ii) Which enzyme of heme biosynthesis is inhibited by lead?

a) ALA dehydratase

b) Uroporphyrinogen I synthase

c) Uroporphyrinogen Decarboxylase

d) Protoporphyrinogen Oxidase

Answer: a) ALA dehydratase




iii) Renal tubular functions can be assessed by

a) Urea clearance

b) Plasma electrolytes

c) Specific gravity of urine

d) Plasma urea

Answer: c) Specific gravity of urine




iv) Metabolic alkalosis is characterised by

a) High hydrogen ion concentration in plasma

b) Increased pCO₂

c) Elevated chloride level in serum

d) Low potassium level

Answer: d) Low potassium level




v) Which amino acid is required for the both purine and pyrimidine synthesis?

a) Glycine

b) Aspartate

c) Alanine
d) Glutamate

Answer: b) Aspartate




vi) All the findings are seen in Orotic aciduria




1. Megaloblastic anemia

2. Response to oral uridine

3. Failure to thrive

4. Deficiency of HGPRTase

a) 1, 2, 3

b) 2, 3, 4

c) 1, 3, 4

d) 1, 2, 4

Answer: a) 1, 2, 3




vii) Post translational modifications include




1. Glycosylation

2. Hydroxylation

3. Decarboxylation

4. Phosphorylation

a) 1, 2, 3

b) 2, 3, 4

c) 1, 3, 4

d) 1, 2, 4

Answer: d) 1, 2, 4
viii) All the following can lead to cancer




1. Promotor insertion

2. Chromosomal translocation

3. Point mutation

4. Trinucleotide expansion

a) 1, 2, 3

b) 2, 3, 4

c) 1, 3, 4

d) 1, 2, 4

Answer: a) 1, 2, 3




ix) Southern Blotting analysis is used for




1. Detecting the presence of a mutant gene

2. Visualising DNA profile

3. Studying a microarray

4. Detecting Restriction fragment length polymorphism

a) 1, 2, 3

b) 2, 3, 4

c) 1, 3, 4

d) 1, 2, 4

Answer: d) 1, 2, 4




x) All are true regarding tRNA
1. Aminoacid is attached to 3’ end

2. Anticodon sequence is at 5’ end

3. Contains several modified bases

4. Has a clover leaf pattern due to hydrogen bonding

a) 1, 2, 3

b) 2, 3, 4

c) 1, 3, 4

d) 1, 2, 4

Answer: c) 1, 3, 4



xi) Assertion (A): Phototherapy with blue light is given to newborns with jaundice

Reason (R): Phototherapy isomerizes soluble isomers of bilirubin to insoluble forms and
increases the blood level of bilirubin

a) Both A and R are correct and R is the reason for A

b) A correct and R incorrect

c) A incorrect and R correct

d) Both A and R are incorrect

Answer: b) A correct and R incorrect




xii) Assertion (A): Protein buffer system is the most efficient extracellular buffer system

Reason (R): Presence of bicarbonate in relatively very high concentrations in protein buffer
system

a) Both A and R are correct and R is the reason for A

b) A correct and R incorrect

c) A incorrect and R correct

d) Both A and R are incorrect
Answer: d) Both A and R are incorrect




xiii) Assertion (A): Retroviruses are used as vectors in gene therapy

Reason (R): Retroviruses are replication deficient and infection with viral particle is limited to
one cycle

a) Both A and R are correct and R is the reason for A

b) A correct and R incorrect

c) A incorrect and R correct

d) Both A and R are incorrect

Answer: a) Both A and R are correct and R is the reason for A




xiv) Assertion (A): The largest and primary response immunoglobulin is Immunoglobulin G

Reason (R): Immunoglobulin G can pass from vascular compartment to interstitial space

a) Both A and R are correct and R is the reason for A

b) A correct and R incorrect

c) A incorrect and R correct

d) Both A and R are incorrect

Answer: c) A incorrect and R correct




xv) Assertion (A): p53 is an oncogene

Reason (R): p53 upregulates PCNA gene transcription and induces cell division

a) Both A and R are correct and R is the reason for A

b) A correct and R incorrect

c) A incorrect and R correct

d) Both A and R are incorrect

Answer: d) Both A and R are incorrect
xvi) A 3 year old boy was brought to the Paediatric OP with periorbital puffiness, oedema of
legs, reduction in urine output and hematuria. On examination, Blood urea–90mg%, Serum
creatinine – 2.7 mg%, urine-albumin ++, blood - +, sugar - nil. What is the probable diagnosis?

a) Nephrotic syndrome

b) Glomerulonephritis

c) Renal tubular acidosis

d) Diabetic nephropathy

Answer: b) Glomerulonephritis




xvii) Measurement of clearance is predominantly the test for detecting the function of

a) Glomeruli

b) Proximal convoluted tubule

c) Loop of Henle

d) Distal convoluted tubule

Answer: a) Glomeruli




xviii) Creatinine clearance test depend on

a) Diet

b) Total muscle mass of body

c) Age

d) Sex

Answer: b) Total muscle mass of body




xix) The first protein to be excreted in urine in glomerular damage is

a) Albumin

b) Transferrin
c) Hemoglobin

d) Bence-Jones protein

Answer: b) Transferrin




xx) Which anions are not normally present in urine?

a) Phosphate

b) Sulphate

c) Chloride

d) Protein

Answer: d) Protein




(i) In lipid storage disorder characterized by cherry red spot in the retina is

a) Gaucher’s disease

b) Zellweger’s syndrome

c) Fabry’s disease

d) Tay–Sachs disease

Answer: d) Tay–Sachs disease




(ii) Glycine is used for synthesis of all the following compounds except

a) Guanine

b) Glutamine

c) Glutathione

d) Creatine

Answer: b) Glutamine
(iii) The structure of insulin receptor is

a) Contains extracellular units only

b) Made up of four similar subunits

c) Has binding sites for insulin in four subunits

d) Possesses tyrosine kinase activity

Answer: d) Possesses tyrosine kinase activity




(iv) Which of the following contain iron?

a) Ceruloplasmin

b) Xanthine oxidase

c) Albumin

d) Superoxide dismutase

Answer: d) Superoxide dismutase




(v) The water-soluble vitamin synthesised in human body is

a) Ascorbic acid

b) Pyridoxine

c) Niacin

d) Pantothenic acid

Answer: c) Niacin




(vi) Mitochondria is the site of the following pathways




1. Citric acid cycle

2. Electron transport chain

3. Beta oxidation of fatty acid
4. De novo fatty acid synthesis

a) 1, 2, 3

b) 2, 3, 4

c) 1, 3, 4

d) 1, 2, 4

Answer: a) 1, 2, 3




(vii) The characteristics by which isoenzymes can be separated are




1. Electrophoretic motility

2. Heat stability

3. Difference in Km value

4. Chemical reaction catalyzed

a) 1, 2, 3

b) 2, 3, 4

c) 1, 3, 4

d) 1, 2, 4

Answer: a) 1, 2, 3



(viii) The abnormalities seen in obese individuals are




1. Decreased glucose tolerance

2. High insulin levels

3. Hypoalbuminemia

4. Hyperlipidemia

a) 1, 2, 3
b) 2, 3, 4

c) 1, 3, 4

d) 1, 2, 4

Answer: d) 1, 2, 4




(ix) Acetyl CoA is used for the production of




1. Oxidation in TCA cycle

2. De novo synthesis of fatty acid

3. Glucose

4. Cholesterol

a) 1, 2, 3

b) 2, 3, 4

c) 1, 3, 4

d) 1, 2, 4

Answer: d) 1, 2, 4




(x) The following statements are true regarding ATP synthesis



1. ATP is formed by phosphorylation of ADP

2. Proton gradient is dissipated

3. Oxidation is coupled to phosphorylation

4. Inner membrane pores of mitochondria are opened to release ATP

a) 1, 2, 3

b) 2, 3, 4

c) 1, 3, 4
d) 1, 2, 4

Answer: a) 1, 2, 3




(xi) Assertion (A): Calcitonin lowers blood calcium level

Reason (R): Calcitonin inhibits bone resorption

a) Both A and R are correct and R is the reason for A

b) A correct and R incorrect

c) A incorrect and R correct

d) Both A and R are incorrect

Answer: a) Both A and R are correct and R is the reason for A



(xii) Assertion (A): Children have a higher level of alkaline phosphatase in serum compared to
adults

Reason (R): Increased osteoclastic activity occur in children

a) Both A and R are correct and R is the reason for A

b) A correct and R incorrect

c) A incorrect and R correct

d) Both A and R are incorrect

Answer: b) A correct and R incorrect




(xiii) Assertion (A): Hypouricemia occurs in Von Gierke’s disease

Reason (R): Glucose-6-phosphate channelled to HMP shunt pathway produces more ribose in
Von Gierke’s disease

a) Both A and R are correct and R is the reason for A

b) A correct and R incorrect

c) A incorrect and R correct

d) Both A and R are incorrect
Answer: d) Both A and R are incorrect




(xiv) Assertion (A): Lipoprotein(a) is very weakly associated with Myocardial infarction

Reason (R): Lipoprotein(a) is attached to apo-E by a disulfide bond

a) Both A and R are correct and R is the reason for A

b) A correct and R incorrect

c) A incorrect and R correct

d) Both A and R are incorrect

Answer: b) A correct and R incorrect




(xv) Assertion (A): Increased excretion of neutral amino acids occur in Hartnup’s disease

Reason (R): Defective transport of neutral amino acids across the brain cells occur in
Hartnup’s disease

a) Both A and R are correct and R is the reason for A

b) A correct and R incorrect

c) A incorrect and R correct

d) Both A and R are incorrect

Answer: b) A correct and R incorrect




(xvi) A 4-year-old boy came to paediatric OP with mental retardation, Charlie-Chaplin gait and
skeletal deformities. On performing the investigations, plasma cysteine levels are markedly
reduced. What is the probable diagnosis?

a) Cystinosis

b) Homocystinuria

c) Cystinuria

d) Cystathioninuria

Answer: b) Homocystinuria
(xvii) Which is the common eye abnormality in these patients?

a) Hypermetropia

b) Astigmatism

c) Ectopia lentis

d) Conjunctivitis

Answer: c) Ectopia lentis




(xviii) What is the classical enzyme defect in this disorder?

a) Cystathionase

b) Cystathionine Beta Synthase

c) Methionine synthase

d) Cysteine oxidase

Answer: b) Cystathionine Beta Synthase




(xix) Which test is positive in urine in the above disease?

a) Ferric chloride test

b) Obermeyer test

c) Cyanide nitroprusside test

d) Guthrie test

Answer: a) Ferric chloride test




(xx) Treatment of this condition is to give a diet

a) Low in methionine

b) Low in cysteine

c) Low in cobalamin
d) Low in pyridoxine

Answer: a) Low in methionine




i) A person has a meal at 8 pm at night and records blood glucose at 6 am on the next day,
which came to 180 mg/dl. What is the source of this glucose?

a) Dietary glucose

b) Hepatic gluconeogenesis

c) Hepatic glycogenolysis

d) Protein breakdown

Answer: b) Hepatic gluconeogenesis




ii) Patient with tendon xanthoma, high LDL and high serum cholesterol. What is the diagnosis?

a) LPL deficiency

b) Tangier’s disease

c) Familial hypercholesterolemia

d) Familial hyperchylomicronemia

Answer: c) Familial hypercholesterolemia




iii) Which of the following amino acid is both glucogenic and ketogenic?

a) Leucine

b) Serine

c) Phenylalanine

d) Alanine

Answer: c) Phenylalanine
iv) What is the normal reference range of blood urea in adults?

a) 5–15 g/dL

b) 10–20 g/dL

c) 20–40 mg/dL

d) 40–60 mg/dL

Answer: c) 20–40 mg/dL




v) Which of the following is considered a complete protein source?

a) Legumes

b) Rice

c) Egg

d) Nuts

Answer: c) Egg




vi) Regarding transport mechanisms choose the correct statement




1. Oxygen and nutrients transport through simple diffusion.

2. Facilitated diffusion does not require energy

3. Mechanism of SGLUT is by facilitated diffusion

4. Ion channels are transmembrane proteins.

a) 1 & 2

b) 2 & 4

c) 2 & 3

d) 2, 3 & 4

Answer: b) 2 & 4
vii) The false statements about citric acid cycle are




1. Enzymes of cycle are in mitochondrial matrix.

2. Substrate level phosphorylation occurs through conversion of succinate to fumarate.

3. Krebs cycle is both catabolic as well as anabolic, hence called as anaplerotic.

4. Fluoroacetate blocks Krebs cycle by inhibiting aconitase.

a) 1 & 2

b) 2 & 4

c) 2 & 3

d) 2, 3 & 4

Answer: c) 2 & 3




viii) Which of the following are considered as lipotropic factors and helps prevent fatty liver




1. Choline

2. Carnitine

3. Selenium

4. Methionine

a) 1 & 2

b) 2 & 4

c) 1 & 3

d) 1, 3 & 4

Answer: a) 1 & 2




ix) Which of the following cell organelles are correctly matched with their marker enzymes?
1. Mitochondria – ATP synthase

2. Lysosome – Acid phosphatase

3. Peroxisome – Catalase

4. Endoplasmic reticulum – Lactate dehydrogenase

a) 1 & 2

b) 2 & 4

c) 2 & 3

d) 1, 2 & 3

Answer: d) 1, 2 & 3



x) Essential fatty acids are




1. Linoleic acid

2. Linolenic acid

3. Oleic acid

4. Arachidonic acid

a) 1 & 2

b) 3 & 4

c) 2 & 3

d) 2, 3 & 4

Answer: a) 1 & 2




xi) Assertion (A): Humans and monkeys can synthesise ascorbic acid

Reason (R): Due to presence of enzyme L-gulonolactone hydroxylase

a) Both A and R are correct but R is not the reason for A
b) Both A and R are incorrect

c) A correct and R incorrect

d) Both A and R are correct and R is the reason for A

Answer: b) Both A and R are incorrect




xii) Assertion (A): When a person moves from bright light to an area of dim light, there is
difficulty in seeing.

Reason (R): Rhodopsin is depleted in bright light

a) Both A and R are correct but R is not the reason for A

b) Both A and R are incorrect

c) A correct and R incorrect

d) Both A and R are correct and R is the reason for A

Answer: d) Both A and R are correct and R is the reason for A



xiii) Assertion (A): Polyneuritis is commonly seen in chronic alcoholics

Reason (R): Alcohol metabolism requires thiamine leading to thiamine depletion

a) Both A and R are correct but R is not the reason for A

b) Both A and R are incorrect

c) A correct and R incorrect

d) Both A and R are correct and R is the reason for A

Answer: c) A correct and R incorrect




xiv) Assertion (A): Ethanol is used as an antidote in methanol poisoning.

Reason (R): Ethanol competitively inhibits alcohol dehydrogenase & prevents forming toxic
methanol metabolites.

a) Both A and R are correct but R is not the reason for A

b) Both A and R are incorrect
c) A correct and R incorrect

d) Both A and R are correct and R is the reason for A

Answer: d) Both A and R are correct and R is the reason for A




xv) Assertion (A): Aspirin reduces inflammation and pain.

Reason (R): Aspirin inhibits cyclooxygenase enzyme, blocking prostaglandin synthesis.

a) Both A and R are correct but R is not the reason for A

b) Both A and R are incorrect

c) A correct and R incorrect

d) Both A and R are correct and R is the reason for A

Answer: d) Both A and R are correct and R is the reason for A




xvi) Which of the following enzymes will be inhibited

a) Aconitase

b) Cytochrome oxidase

c) Cytochrome reductase

d) Cytochrome c

Answer: b) Cytochrome oxidase



xvii) What kind of inhibition will occur in this case?

a) Competitive inhibition

b) Non-competitive inhibition

c) Allosteric inhibition

d) Suicide inhibition

Answer: b) Non-competitive inhibition
xviii) What will happen to the Vmax?

a) Unchanged

b) Increases

c) Decrease

d) Initially increases then decreases

Answer: c) Decrease




xix) Following are the examples with same process of inhibition EXCEPT

a) Heavy metals

b) Fluoride

c) Iodoacetate

d) Allopurinol

Answer: d) Allopurinol



xx) Which of the following about the given inhibition is true

a) Increasing substrate concentration will abolish the inhibition

b) Increasing substrate concentration will not abolish the inhibition

c) Inhibitor binds to same domain as the substrate binding site

d) Both a and c

Answer: b) Increasing substrate concentration will not abolish the inhibition




i) Congenital lactic acidosis may occur due to defect in

(A) Pyruvate Carboxylase

(B) Pyruvate Kinase

(C) Pyruvate Dehydrogenase
(D) Transketolase

Answer: (C) Pyruvate Dehydrogenase




ii) An isoenzyme variant of one of the following appears during pregnancy

(A) Creatine kinase

(B) Lactate dehydrogenase

(C) Alkaline phosphatase

(D) Aldehyde dehydrogenase

Answer: (C) Alkaline phosphatase




iii) Schilling's test is used for assessment of

(A) Calcium deficiency

(B) Iron deficiency

(C) Vitamin B12 deficiency

(D) Vitamin K deficiency

Answer: (C) Vitamin B12 deficiency




iv) Hyperammonemia inhibits TCA cycle by depleting

(A) Oxaloacelate

(B) α-Ketoglutarate

(C) Citrate

(D) Succinyl CoA

Answer: (B) α-Ketoglutarate



v) A child brought to the emergency department with accidental ingestion of Cyanide. Death
due to Cyanide poisoning is a result of
a) Cyanide-hemoglobin complex formation

b) Cyanide inhibits complex I of respiratory chain

c) Cyanide inhibits Cytochrome oxidase

d) Cyanide blocking oxygen transport in blood

Answer: (c) Cyanide inhibits Cytochrome oxidase



vi) The following statements about Glycosaminoglycans are true




1. Proteins associated with glycosaminoglycans are called core proteins

2. Highly positively charged

3. Hyaluronic acid has role in cell migration during morphogenesis

4. Most abundant GAG is Chondroitin Sulfate

(A) 1, 3 correct

(B) 1, 3, 4 correct

(C) 2, 4 correct

(D) 1, 2, 3, 4 correct

Answer: (B) 1, 3, 4 correct




vii) Elevated Homocysteine levels are associated with which of the following




1. Increased cardiovascular diseases

2. Deficiency of vitamin B6

3. Deficiency of Folic acid

4. Deficiency of Vitamin B12

(A) 1, 3, 4 correct

(B) 2, 4 correct
(C) 1, 2, 3, 4 correct

(D) 1, 4 correct

Answer: (C) 1, 2, 3, 4 correct




viii) True statements about membrane transport




1. Facilitated diffusion is a carrier mediated process that does not need energy

2. Direction and magnitude of ion fluxes via membrane is determined by electrochemical
gradient across the membrane

3. Osmosis is the flow of solvent across a selectively permeable membrane

4. Calcium pump operating in sarcoplasmic reticulum in muscle does not need energy

(A) 1, 3 correct

(B) 1, 3, 4 correct

(C) 1, 2, 3 correct

(D) 2, 3 correct

Answer: (C) 1, 2, 3 correct




ix) True statements about biomarkers of myocardial infarction



1. Elevation of myoglobin is considered to be one of the earliest biomarker of myocardial
infarction

2. Trop I and Trop T serve as biomarkers of myocardial infarction

3. ALT levels are elevated to the peak at 36 to 48 hours following myocardial infarction

4. CKBB isoenzyme levels elevated 3 to 6 hours following myocardial infarction

(A) 1, 2, 3 correct

(B) 2, 4 correct

(C) 1, 2, 4 correct
(D) 1, 2 correct

Answer: (D) 1, 2 correct




x) Insulin increases the activity of the following enzymes




1. Acetyl CoA carboxylase

2. Hormone Sensitive Lipase

3. Glycogen Phosphorylase

4. Glucose 6 Phosphate Dehydrogenase

(A) 2, 3 correct

(B) 2, 4 correct

(C) 1, 4 correct

(D) 1, 2, 4 correct

Answer: (C) 1, 4 correct




xi) Assertion (A): Higher primates can synthesise ascorbic acid via Glucuronic acid pathway.

Reason (R): Gulonolactone oxidase enzyme is present in higher primates

a) Both A and R are true, but R is NOT the correct explanation of A

b) Both A and R are false

c) A is true but R is false

d) Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A

Answer: (b) Both A and R are false




xii) Assertion (A): Mannitol is used to treat head trauma.

Reason (R): Mannitol is an osmotic diuretic and reduces intracranial pressure.

a) Both A and R are true, but R is NOT the correct explanation of A
b) Both A and R are false

c) A is true but R is false

d) Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A

Answer: (d) Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A




xiii) Assertion (A): Piericidin and Rotenone are inhibitors of electron transport chain.

Reason (R): Piericidin and Rotenone inhibit the flow of electron between complex I and
Ubiquinone

a) Both A and R are true, but R is NOT the correct explanation of A

b) Both A and R are false

c) A is true but R is false

d) Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A

Answer: (d) Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A



xiv) Assertion (A): Hemolysis and renal failure are seen in viper poisoning

Reason (R): Phospholipase C hydrolyzes lecithin to phosphoryl choline

a) Both A and R are true, but R is NOT the correct explanation of A

b) Both A and R are false

c) A is true but R is false

d) Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A

Answer: (c) A is true but R is false




xv) Assertion (A): Patients with Hartnup's disease are at risk of developing Wernicke's
Korsakoff's syndrome

Reason (R): Hartnup's disease impairs intestinal absorption and renal reabsorption of neutral
amino acids like tryptophan

a) Both A and R are true, but R is NOT the correct explanation of A
b) Both A and R are false

c) A is true but R is false

d) Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A

Answer: (d) Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A




xvi) A 45-year-old software engineer presented to the casualty with fracture femur following
a trivial injury. Laboratory investigations revealed Vitamin D3 level of 5 ng/ml. Serum ALP was
elevated. What is the probable diagnosis?

(A) Vitamin D resistant rickets

(B) Hypophosphatemic rickets

(C) Osteomalacia

(D) Ehlers–Danlos Syndrome

Answer: (C) Osteomalacia




xvii) Clinical features of Rickets include all except?

(A) Rickety Rosary

(B) Excavated Chest

(C) Knock-Knee

(D) Harrison's Sulcus

Answer: (B) Excavated Chest




xviii) What is the active form of Vitamin D?

(A) 1,25 dihydroxy cholecalciferol

(B) Cholecalciferol

(C) 24,25 dihydroxy cholecalciferol

(D) 25 hydroxy cholecalciferol

Answer: (A) 1,25 dihydroxy cholecalciferol
xix) What is the adequate level of Vitamin D3?

(A) 40 ng/ml

(B) 50 ng/ml

(C) 30 ng/ml

(D) 60 ng/ml

Answer: (C) 30 ng/ml




xx) Following are good sources of Vitamin D, except

(A) Fish

(B) Egg White

(C) Egg Yolk

(D) Meat

Answer: (B) Egg White




i. Hepatorenal tyrosinemia is due to defect of the enzyme

(A) Phenylalanine hydroxylase

(B) Homogentisic acid oxidase

(C) Fumaryl acetoacetate hydrolase

(D) Tyrosine amino transferase

Answer: (C) Fumaryl acetoacetate hydrolase



ii. All the compounds given below are nitrogenous phospholipids except

(A) Phosphatidyl Serine
(B) Phosphatidyl Ethanolamine

(C) Phosphatidyl Choline

(D) Phosphatidyl Inositol

Answer: (D) Phosphatidyl Inositol




iii. Which among these bases is not a purine

(A) Xanthine

(B) Adenine

(C) Uracil

(D) Guanine

Answer: (C) Uracil




iv. Mobility of particles during electrophoresis is based on all the following factors except;

(A) Current, voltage, ampere

(B) Quality of supporting medium

(C) pH of buffer

(D) Solubility of particular protein

Answer: (D) Solubility of particular protein



v. Cyanide Nitroprusside test is negative in

(A) Cystinuria

(B) Cystinosis

(C) Homocystinuria

(D) Cystathioninuria

Answer: (B) Cystinosis
vi. Assertion (A) - Essential Fatty acids have to be supplied to the body through diet; because
they cannot be synthesized by the body

Reasoning (R) - Humans lack desaturase enzyme which introduce double bonds at carbon
atom beyond C9 in fatty acid chain.

(A) Both A and R are correct but R is not the reason for A

(B) A incorrect R correct

(C) Both A and R are incorrect

(D) Both A and R are correct but R is the reason for A

Answer: (D) Both A and R are correct but R is the reason for A




vii. A - The aminoacid which is abundant in the structure of collagen is glycine.

R - glycine is the simplest and smallest aminoacid

(A) Both A and R are correct but R is not the reason for A

(B) A incorrect R correct

(C) Both A and R are incorrect

(D) Both A and R are correct but R is the reason for A

Answer: (D) Both A and R are correct but R is the reason for A




viii. A - Excess glucose is stored as glycogen in the body

R - Storage of glucose as glycogen creates no osmotic pressure problem for the cell

(A) Both A and R are correct but R is not the reason for A

(B) A incorrect R correct

(C) Both A and R are incorrect

(D) Both A and R are correct but R is the reason for A

Answer: (D) Both A and R are correct but R is the reason for A




ix. A - Lipids are amphipathic
R - Lipids possess both hydrophobic and hydrophilic groups

(A) Both A and R are correct but R is not the reason for A

(B) A incorrect R correct

(C) Both A and R are incorrect

(D) Both A and R are correct but R is the reason for A

Answer: (D) Both A and R are correct but R is the reason for A




x. A - Primary hyperoxaluria is an autosomal recessive disease due to protein targeting defect.

R - Enzyme alanine glyoxylate aminotransferase is located in hepatic peroxisomes, instead of
mitochondria

(A) Both A and R are correct but R is not the reason for A

(B) A incorrect R correct

(C) Both A and R are incorrect

(D) Both A and R are correct but R is the reason for A

Answer: (D) Both A and R are correct but R is the reason for A




xi. Enzymes catalysing irreversible steps in glycolysis are




1. Hexokinase

2. Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase

3. 1,3 bisphosphoglycerate kinase

4. Pyruvate kinase

(A) 1,4 correct

(B) 1,3 correct

(C) 1,2,3,4 correct

(D) 1,3,4 correct
Answer: (A) 1,4 correct




xii. Which of the following lipids are present in cell membranes




1. Lecithin

2. Cholesterol

3. Phosphatidyl Inositol

4. Triacylglycerol

(A) 1,3 correct

(B) 1,2,3 correct

(C) 1,2,4 correct

(D) 1,2,3,4 correct

Answer: (B) 1,2,3 correct




xiii. Markers of Lysosome




1. ATP Synthase

2. Cathepsin

3. Lactate dehydrogenase

4. Acid phosphatase

(A) 1,2 correct

(B) 1,2,3 correct

(C) 2,4 correct

(D) 1,3,4 correct

Answer: (C) 2,4 correct
xiv. Aminoacids that will undergo transamination




1. Lysine

2. Proline

3. Tryptophan

4. Threonine

(A) 1,2,4 correct

(B) 1,2,3 correct

(C) only 1 correct

(D) 2,3,4 correct

Answer: (D) 2,3,4 correct




xv. Serine is a precursor for



1. Cysteine

2. Ethanolamine

3. Choline

4. Glycine

5. Methionine

(A) 1,2,3,4,5 correct

(B) 1,2,3,4 correct

(C) 1,2,3,5 correct

(D) 2,3,4 correct

Answer: (B) 1,2,3,4 correct
Scenario: A 4 year old child developed hypoglycemia after moderate activity in the morning.
On examination liver and kidneys were enlarged. Blood examination revealed raised levels of
ketone bodies, lactic acid and triglycerides. Biopsy of liver showed increased glycogen
content




xvi. What is the probable diagnosis?

(A) McArdle's disease

(B) Cori's disease

(C) Von Gierke's disease

(D) Pompe's disease

Answer: (C) Von Gierke's disease




xvii. Enzyme defect in the above case?

(A) Glycogen phosphorylase

(B) Glucose 6 phosphatase

(C) Debranching enzyme

(D) Branching enzyme

Answer: (B) Glucose 6 phosphatase




xviii. Which of the following is not affected in the above disease?

(A) Liver

(B) Kidney

(C) Intestinal mucosa

(D) Muscle

Answer: (D) Muscle




xix. The enzyme common to both glycogenolysis and glycogenesis
(A) Glycogen phosphorylase

(B) Glycogen synthase

(C) Glucotransferase

(D) Carboxykinase

Answer: (C) Glucotransferase




xx. An enzyme not involved in Muscle Glycogenolysis is

(A) Glycogen phosphorylase

(B) Glucose 6 phosphatase

(C) Debranching enzyme

(D) Glucotransferase

Answer: (B) Glucose 6 phosphatase
